Ensemble Learning Ensemble Learning • Machine learning model which combines the predictions of several machine learning models to improve the prediction accuracy of using a single classifier • It is developed to overcome the limitations of using a single hypothesis machine learning model. Principle • To ensemble hypotheses of different models either by combining the collective predictions of different models into a single final model or by employing different models in a sequential fashion to increase the accuracy of learning process. • It is used to solve both classification and regression problems by reducing bias and variance and to boost accuracy of models. Applications • Remote sensing • Security • Gene classification • Image segmentation • Video retrieval • healthcare Ensembling • Process of combining many weak learners to produce a strong leaner that performs better than a single weak learner. • To learn better with a set of models instead of making one model to learn better. Ensembling methods • Majority voting – Taking average or weighted average of multiple machine learning models or base learners • Stacking – Uses predictions of multiple models as features to train a new model and then predict from that model • To employ same machine learning model multiple times with different datasets and combine the hypothesis generated from these models Bagging and Boosting • Bagging – Method of ensembling simultaneously many independent models and averaging the predictions obtained from the different models. – It solves overfitting problem in single classifier – It minimizes variance • Boosting – Employs different classifiers in a sequential fashion where the prediction made by a classifier is enhanced by boosting the weights for the data instances and consecutively the predicted output is given as input to next learning model. – It increases accuracy Advantages • Minimizes bias and variance of a weak learner. • Reduces overfitting and underfitting of the model. • Increases accuracy of prediction. • Handles higher dimensionality data efficiently. Disadvantages • Does not give precise value for the classification and regression model. • Error prone and sometimes leads to overfitting. • Requires careful tuning of the number and types of features used. Ensembling Techniques • Ensemble models are generally classified as Parallel and Sequential ensemble models. • Classified as ‘Homogenous’ and ‘Heterogenous’ ensemble models. • In homogenous ensemble model, same type of base learners are used, whereas in Heterogenous ensemble model, different type of basic learners are used for ensembling. Contd… • In Parallel ensemble model, base learner learn simultaneously and independently. • Include Voting, Bootstrap, Resampling, Bagging and Random forest. • In sequential ensemble model, they learn sequentially. • AdaBoost, Gradient Tree Boosting and XGBoost also called as boosting model. • Parallel ensemble learners are time and space efficient compared to sequential ensemble learners. Voting and Bootstrap Resampling • Voting is the process of combining multiple ML models or using same model multiple times as base learners. • In regression problem it takes average of their predictions, whereas in classification problem the maximum vote of their prediction. • Bootstrap is the process of creating many bootstrap samples using a method called Random sampling from training dataset. • Each sample contains 63.2% distinct tuples and remaining are duplicate tuples from the original dataset. Bagging • Also called as Bootstrap Aggregation. • It combines both bootstrapping and aggregation. • Trains M independent weak classifier with each classifier containing bootstrap samples • If the target is categorical variable - majority voting continuous variable - averaging Random Forest • Instead of training different model with same features , this model chooses random set of features to construct decision tree. • Collection of trees with each tree constructed with random samples, random set of features and random split features. • Learning model is decision tree with subset of features, ensemble model improves the efficiency with quick searching. Random Forest • Step 1: Select random samples from a given data or training set. • Step 2: This algorithm will construct a decision tree for every training data. • Step 3: Voting will take place by averaging the decision tree. • Step 4: Finally, select the most voted prediction result as the final prediction result. RF Algorithm Steps • Step 1: Create M bootstrap samples of N data instances using Random Sampling with replacement • Step 2: Choose number of decision trees to be constructed DTM • Step 3: Choose the number of features to be used in each tree. Normally sqrt(D) randomly chosen features are taken • Step 4: Choose the depth of the decision tree. All trees are to be same depth. • Step 5: Repeat M times. For each tree – Choose a bootstrap sample Si of N data instances – Compute the best split feature to be placed at each node – Construct decision tree using CART. Do not prune the tree • Step 6: Combine predictions from all classifiers by taking average for regression problem and majority voting for classification problem. Advantages and Disadvantages • Can solve both classification and regression problems • Reduces overfitting and variance compared to single decision tree • Provides more accuracy • Performs well even with smaller dataset • Disadvantages – Increased complexity – Uses more computational resources Incremental Ensemble Models • Use the predictions that are learnt from the previous learner as features to train a meta learner and make final predictions • Types – Stacking – Cascading Stacking • Meta modelling technique • Includes two types of learners called base-learners and meta-learner • Process of ensembling multiple heterogeneous machine learning models or base learners to make predictions and then use these predictions as features to train the second level meta learner model • Base learners use normal ML models whereas meta learner fits on predictions of the base learner. • Meta leaner can be meta-regressor or meta-classifier • Further extension of stacking is called multi-level stacking Cascading • Mulistage learning technique with a sequence of classifiers ordered in terms of increasing complexity and specificity such that early classifiers are simple and general whereas later ones are more complex and specific. • It moves to the next stage of learning only if the preceding learner’s prediction is not confident. • Complexity increases as more models are added to the cascade. Sequential Ensemble Models • Use multiple weak learners sequentially and the error exhibited by a weak learner is used to give importance to data instances which are further retrained by the next weak learner. AdaBoost • Also called Adaptive Boosting is a popular boosting algorithm and it is non-linear classifier. • Sequential ensemble model that trains multiple weak classifiers sequentially • It would train one weak classifier at a time, so that the errors made by poorly performing weak classifiers are reduced when they are trained sequentially • AdaBoost is a greedy algorithm optimizing weights of data instances in the training dataset by adding a weak classifier at each step. • Each weak classifier is trained with a random bootstrap sample drawn from the training dataset. • Initially weights are assigned to all data instances in the training dataset with equal probability. • If there are 10 data instances in training dataset, the probability of choosing a data instance will be 1/10. • After training by one weak classifier, the weights of all data instances are boosted based on the accuracy of classification done by it. • The idea of boosting is to minimize the errors made by a weak classifier by increasing the weights of misclassified data instances and decreasing the weights of correctly classified data instances. • The updated probabilities of data instances are reflected in the training dataset and these instances get trained with the next classifier. • Each weak classifier is also assigned a weight after training, based on the accuracy of the classification. • If the classifier is more accurate, it is given more weight • A 50% accurate classifier is given a weight of 0. • If the classifier has less than 50% accuracy, it gets a negative weight. • There are many weak classifiers such as decision trees, decision stumps, multilayer perceptron. • Linear classifiers such as decision stumps are on- level decision trees which perform poorly with low accuracy. • The depth of decision stumps is 1 and it has two leaves. • The final classifier makes a linear combination of all the predictions made by the weak classifiers. AdaBoost Algorithm Steps • Step1: Assign uniform weights 1/N to all data instances in the training dataset • Step2: Repeat for each weak classifier – Train a weak classifier Hi with random bootstrap samples from training dataset T – Compute the weighted error Ɛi of Hi on current training dataset – Compute the weight of each weak classifier αi based on error rate. – Calculate the normalizing factor Zi – Update the weight of all data instances • Step 3: Compute final predicted value for each data instance. It is the linear combination of weighted average predictions of all the classifiers multiplied by weight αi computed for each classifier