Support Vector Machine Hard Margin SVM-Optimization Problem • If the data points are less, then it is easy to find the support vectors • In practical, for large data points, it is not feasible. • So SVM construction is reformulated into optimization problem • Any problem whose objective function needs to be maximized or minimized subject to the constraints is called optimization problem. • Since SVM involves maximization of margin, it can be modelled as optimization problem. Method for optimal problem • State the problem as a primal optimization problem • Convert that to dual Lagrangian problem. Finally using the solutions construct the hyperplanes Hard Margin Vs Soft margin • When the data is linearly separable, and we don’t want to have any misclassifications, we use SVM with a hard margin. • However, when a linear boundary is not feasible, or we want to allow some misclassifications in the hope of achieving better generality, we can opt for a soft margin for our classifier. SVM with a Hard Margin • we can define the margin by two parallel hyperplanes: • Without allowing any misclassifications in the hard margin SVM, we want to maximize the distance between the two hyperplanes. • We want to maximize this margin. Without the loss of generality, we can consider and .Subsequently, the problem would be to maximize or minimize . • To make the problem easier when taking the gradients, we’ll, instead, word with its squared form: • This optimization comes with some constraints. • Let’s assume that the labels for our classes are {-1, +1}. • When classifying the data points, we want the points belonging to positives classes to be greater than +1, meaning and the points belonging to the negative classes to be less than - 1, i.e. . • We can combine these two constraints and express them as: . Therefore our optimization problem would become: i.e • This optimization is called the primal problem and is guaranteed to have a global minimum. • We can solve this by introducing Lagrange multipliers ( ) and converting it to the dual problem: SVM with Soft Margin • Misclassifications may happen. • First,need to minimize the misclassification error, which means that we’ll have to deal with one more constraint. • Second, to minimize the error, we should define a loss function. • A common loss function used for soft margin is the hinge loss. • The loss of a misclassified point is called a slack variable and is added to the primal problem that we had for hard margin SVM. So the primal problem for the soft margin becomes: • A new regularization parameter controls the trade-off between maximizing the margin and minimizing the loss. • The difference between the primal problem and the one for the hard margin is the addition of slack variables. • The new slack variables add flexibility for misclassifications of the model Dual Problem